We Begin the day with the numbers needed
to wage and win a war Israel says its
military has enough weapons and
Munitions to press ahead with an
offensive in the southern Gaza City of
Rafa now this comes after a warning from
US President Joe Biden that Washington
could cut some weapons exports to Israel
if the offensive goes ahead the fear of
course massive civilian casualties in
Rafa or tens of thousands of people are
thought to be leaving Rafa looking for
Safe Haven and for most this is not the
first time that they've had to do
this fleeing the fighting in Rafa the
kafana family is once again on the Move
they're headed to canun but fear what
they will find
there canun area is safe but there's no
life there they tell us to go to conun
okay so it's a safe place but it doesn't
have any water or any food or drink or
Aid or anything we don't know what to
do Israel had previously labeled Rafa as
a safe Zone more than a million people
have been Sheltering
there now it's Israel's latest Battle
Zone it says the city is a stronghold
for Hamas
militants tanks Patrol Eastern districts
and air strikes are
escalating with children among the
victims the Israeli Army struck us with
two missiles without warning this is a
criminal
act eight people were martyred among
them were little children who had
nothing to do with any of
this further restrictions on Aid are
making life even worse Israel has shut
off the vital rougher border crossing
leaving Supply warehouses virtually
empty and bringing hospitals to the
brink of
collapse the most important element what
we all need Ur is fuel fuel fuel fuel
then of course also for humanitarian
AIDS but also staff movement and metac
so I want to stress again without fuel
all the humanitarian operations
including Hospital operation they come
to a Hal in the South uh our estimation
is that hospitals only have fuel for two
to 3 days uh
left the United States has repeatedly
warned Israel against a fullscale
offensive in Rafa and has halted some
arms
deliveries Israel though remains defiant
and shows no signs of giving in to
International
pressure all right let's get some more
analysis now with Marina Marone she's
from the war studies department at Kings
College London Mara it's good to see you
again so I mean I'll start by just
asking you do we know I mean has the
invasion of Rafa has it
begun good evening Brent well that's a
great question because uh there is some
unclarity in terms of what the IDF is
doing it seems like it it it's having
some clashes in eastern Rafa with Hamas
militants however we cannot say that the
full scale incursion of Rafa has already
started and um some that this might be a
way to push Hamas to actually agree to
Israeli conditions of the deal for
ceasefire so it might be something like
a show of force which is of course
complicating Israel's position on an
international stage giving the fact that
the US wants to limit its arms shipments
to Israel if that operation is to take
place if it goes beyond being a show of
force and we're talking about a
full-fledged Invasion a ground defensive
against Rafa how do you foresee it
progressing it will be very difficult
for the IDF and I know that Israel said
that it would be very Surgical and very
targeted however it seems like an
oxymoron in an urban environment to have
a targeted operation because the idef
would have to operate amongst civilians
where Hamas militants most likely
dressed in in in civilian clothes so
it's very difficult to distinguish them
from um Regular civilians on the one
hand on the other hand the threat would
be coming from anywhere so this is a
multidirectional threat they will have
to go very slowly section by section
bearing in mind that there is always a
possibility of collateral damage and
there will be essentially collateral
damage because we know the Israeli IDF
is using Air Force as well as artillery
so it will be a very slow and painful
operation and I think the best approach
for the IDF would be going sections by
sections and trying to move civilians
somehow out of the way but there is no
good approach and I don't think they
have a real plan as at this stage and
and and what about the role of the
United States and particularly the the
warning from US President Biden that if
you do go into Rafa the United States
May hold back some of its weapons
shipments to Israel and is that going to
change Israel's abilities at all in an
offensive against
Rafa absolutely I think it will be very
impactful because as for now Israel
still has enough um munition to hold
North and to conduct its limited
operations around Rafa however if the US
is not to supply Israel from an Israeli
point of view they see it as an
existential fight which could be lost
because they will not have enough
Munitions in order to pursue the
remaining four Hamas battalions in Rafa
so that could potentially the
entire operation from from the Israeli
perspective
let's let's assume that the the weapons
are there in the number needed Israel
says that Rafa is home to hamas's last
remaining battalions do you agree with
what we've were're hearing from Israel
that Rafa really would be hamas's Last
Stand it is a very good question I don't
know what kind of intelligence um Israel
has on on the numbers that are still
left but we know that the um IDF has
just now closed the Crossing with Egypt
so there was this assumption that Hamas
was getting its weapons from uh from
Egypt therefore I think it's very likely
that some Hamas Fighters might have
escaped as well and and and have um
other occupied other locations outside
of the Gaza Strip so in in theory if
it's all sealed off at Le Hamas Fighters
uh who are in Rafa could be eliminated
by Israeli Armed Forces however we don't
know if we're talking about the entirety
of Hamas and we also have to understand
that the cause might live on and others
might take up arms in name of Hamas yeah
that's that's a good point um what
happens though if Israel says that it is
going to um achieve its goal of
completely destroying Hamas and it's
going to do that but it's going to need
weapons enough weapons if it says that
to the United States in your
professional opinion can you imagine the
United States withholding weapons and
letting Israel
not achieve the goal of destroying
Hamas well I think the United States uh
is in a very difficult position and I
think uh Jordan has expressed these
concerns because the United States on
the one hand supporting Israel and is
willing uh to send weapons on the other
hand um they are criticizing Israel for
what is happening in Rafa and and in
Gaza in humanitarian terms so I think
that um especially pre-election it will
be a very difficult choice in terms of
how the United States might resolve this
situation but I think they will have to
try and exert enough pressure on Israel
in order to resolve the humanitarian
situation first before any military
action can take place and I see us
involvement in in this specific
operation as well in a humanitarian role
and I think that might be a way forward
in order to get around this as not to
endanger Israel's survival which is from
Israeli perspective is what it is what
it's fighting for in Gaza and without
risking the lives of all those civilians
who are trapped in Gaza Marina
from Kings College London Marina as
always we appreciate your time and your
insights tonight thank
you thank you for having
me I'm joined Now by Laura Blumenfeld
she is a Middle East analyst she served
in the US state department as a senior
policy adviser for that region and she
joins me tonight from Washington DC lord
it's good to have you back on the
program with this US President Biden
says that the United States will
withhold more weapons Israel mounts this
ground operation in Rafa I'm wondering
how big is this stick I mean is this
enough to make Israel back
down I mean from Biden's point of view
this is like a friends don't let friends
drive drunk moment he's taking away the
keys so to speak um for Netanyahu you
know he's standing on the side of the
road and saying I still got to get home
and we'll do it with or without you um
as you know you know he the Israelis
have abandonment ISS issues Netanyahu
spoke about that right to that point on
Holocaust Memorial Day he he gave a
speech this week where he said there
were times when the Jews stood alone in
the world no one came to our Aid and we
will not be defenseless again so he's
really driving hard Netanyahu on this
period of holidays they call it the days
of awe which start on Holocaust Memorial
Day they take you up to uh Memorial Day
for soldiers right up to Israel
Independence Day so he's kind of working
with that calendar to make a political
point which of course has military
implications yeah the military
implications here Biden has said that
the United States will not withhold
defensive weapons like those used for
Israel's Iron Dome for example could
that
change you know of all the bad case
scenarios and believe me I'm
contemplating them I don't see him
pulling back on defensive weapons I mean
even with the with the again remember
we're talking only about a pause on
offensive weapons you had Senators
lining up Republican Senators you know
basically saying that the president is
is abandoning a key Ally and it could
have implications for other allies
around the world I mean the world is
watching other countries if we're saying
you know we're going to put a dent in
this Ironclad Alliance what does it mean
for other countries can you rely on
America are they that dependable State
and what about the Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu he says that
Israel will stand alone if it has
to can it really though stand alone I
mean how far can it push this war
without its most important
Ally right well the IDF the Israel
Defense Forces are heavily dependent on
the United States for weapons um you
know $3.8 billion dollar a year uh
dollars a year they receive in in
military assistance I I think well right
here he's kind of channeling Mackie AI a
little bit and he's he's just saying to
himself you know you need to treat your
enemies generous or destroy them all
together because if you injure them only
slightly they'll come back um to to to
seek revenge and if you don't they won't
be able to and I think he sees senoir
really as a kind of fight to the Finish
and maybe he's hoping I don't know in
his calculation that President Biden
won't even be the US president in a
couple of months yeah I want going to
pick up on that I mean what is at stake
for Joe Biden domestically right now
particularly if he holds a red line with
Israel well it's a very tricky pivot for
Biden because he has been the most
pro-israel president um in US history
and he's been accused of you know being
genocide Joe and then you have the folks
who who were happy with his support for
Israel saying you know hey you were way
to go Joe and where are you now um
they're saying that he's kind of a you
know he's first was talking about the
two-state solution and now it's a
two-face solution there are two bidens
the one who gave that tremendous speech
just a few days ago about the rise of
anti-Semitism and then the Joe Biden who
said no more offensive weapons I would
argue that he's more of a father Abraham
figure and he sees both Palestinians and
Israelis as his children who are
fighting and he he's a man of tremendous
empathy and it's just hard on him to
watch the images coming out of Gaza
where where so many civilians are dying
and he cares deeply I saw him wipe a
tear from the corner of his eye when he
talked about uh visiting Israel in the
days in the aftermath of October 7th and
seeing a picture of an Israeli mother
burned to death while she was tied
together with her daughter I mean this
is real and I do think that a lot of
this some of some he does uh he is
motivated by politics but also by the
personal as well yeah that's a very good
point we want to remind our viewers
you're a bestselling author you've
written a book about revenge for for
acts of violence so I want to ask you
what strikes you about the way Israel is
pursuing its war against tamas for the
attacks of October the 7th
well I think what's really interesting
is you know immediately following
October 7th um President Biden said you
need to learn from our mistakes in
Afghanistan and not not kind of follow
our path um but what he seems to be
advocating for now if you watched his
interview on CNN he said you know we
wanted to get Bin Laden and we can help
you get senoir so in an interesting way
the president is advocating for personal
Revenge rather than military retaliation
it's an interesting pivot yeah it's it's
interesting point that you bring up um
you were a policy adviser to the US
state department on Middle East and the
peace process so let me ask you do you
see a path for the end of the war in
Gaza and do you think the two-state
solution still has any life left in
it well I think it's going to take a lot
of diplomatic finesse and frankly a lot
of emotional intelligence this war it
hasn't been a World War but all of us
the whole world has been at War
emotionally because of the the impact of
social media um I think one way that you
can get the Israelis to kind of look
more toward a two-state solution is
rather than framing it as an opportunity
of normalization with Saudi Arabia which
of course is important right now I think
they do want to just clobber somebody if
you framing as a fight against Iran um
and you know talk about this kind of
Coalition of coexistence to push back on
the axis of resistance that is a point
on a on the horizon I could see the
Israelis aiming for right now given
their emotional state and you have to
take into account the Palestinian trauma
as well it is unprecedented and so we
need to kind of move forward
delicately Laura bloomenfeld joining us
tonight from Washington DC lorda we
appreciate your time and your analysis
tonight thank
you thank you